x86-64 / x64 / AMD64 / IA32e
============================

The UEFI variant is intended for use on real hardware.
The BIOS variant is intended for use on "cloud" VPSes with no UEFI support.

At least 8MiB of physical memory is required to be usable at all.
(first 2MiB reserved, 4MiB for the kernel and 2MiB for initial OS)


Supported hardware
------------------

- [ ] Memory
- [ ] MMU
- [ ] APIC
- [ ] HPET
- [x] UART (COM1/COM2)
- [ ] ACPI
  - [x] MCFG (PCIe)


Boot
----

On boot, a 2MiB code and 2MiB data page is mapped in the negative half.
The code page also contains the initial page table and memory map.
It is entirely immutable.
The page table does *not* include an identity mapping.

The kernel starts running from the start of the codepage.
It clears the data region with zeros, sets up the GDT, IDT and a new page table.


Initial OS
----------

The kernel loads an OS at boot.
This can be a full-fledged OS or a simple stub.

An address space is created with the following ranges defined:

- `0x3fe00000` until `0x40000000`: OS code (RWX)
- `1 << 47` until `1 << 48`: free memory (none)

The initial OS image is limited to at most 2MiB,
but the real limit is even lower as the image is stored
in the code space of the kernel.
Extra code should be loaded by the OS.

All unused regular memory is mapped starting from `1 << 47`.
The range end is stored in RAX on entry.

Page table updates can only be done through system calls.


System calls
------------

System calls are performed through the `syscall` instruction.
`eax` is used to identify the system routine.
The registers used depend on the routine.
`rcx` and `r11` are always clobbered.

System calls may use SSE registers,
but will save and restore them as appropriate.

Unless noted otherwise general purpose registers are always preserved.

If an invalid system call is issued, the OS is immediately halted.

### 1. Syslog

arguments: address in RSI, length in RDX.

returns: amount written in RAX.

### 2. Halt

arguments: none

returns: technically never.
In practice it is up to the interrupt handler,
so do not add any `noreturn` attributes.

### 3. Identify

arguments: none

returns: "GeneSYS" in RAX, `0x20260130` in RDX.
If the identification differs,
the OS should halt immediately, followed by UD2 and a loop:

```
        lea rsi, [msg]
        mov ecx, 36
        mov eax, 1
        syscall
halt:   mov eax, 2
        syscall
        ud2
        jmp halt

msg:    db "error: kernel identification failed", 10
```

### 4. Set configuration space

Set the base address of the configuration space.

arguments: address in RSI

returns: none

### 5. EOI

arguments: interrupt number in EDX

returns: none

### 6. Read debug message

arguments: buffer address in RSI, length in RDX

returns: EAX = 0 on success and length in RDX, EAX < 0 if no message

### 7. Send debug message

arguments: address in RSI, length in RDX

returns: EAX = 0 on success, EAX < 0 on error


Configuration space
-------------------

To avoid frequent privilege switches when communicating with the kernel,
a shared configuration space is used.

The configuration space includes the following items:

| bytes   | description                         |
| -------:|:----------------------------------- |
|     7:0 | exception handler: division         |
|    15:8 | exception handler: overflow         |
|   23:16 | exception handler: invalid opcode   |
|   31:24 | exception handler: page fault       |
|   39:32 | exception handler: FPU              |
|   47:40 | exception handler: machine check    |
|   55:48 | interrupt handler                   |
|   63:56 | exception/interrupt stack           |

On each exception/interrupt,
A 32-byte frame is reserved on the exception/interrupt stack.
This frame is filled with the following values:

| bytes   | description                         |
| -------:|:----------------------------------- |
|     7:0 | previous RIP                        |
|    15:8 | previous RAX                        |
|   23:16 | previous RDX                        |
|   31:24 | previous RDI                        |

The stack grows downwards.
The stack pointer is updated automatically.
Note that exceptions/interrupts cannot be disabled.

RAX/RDX is loaded with exception/interrupt information.
RDI contains stack pointer *after* pushing the frame.


#### Exceptions

A subset of architectural exceptions are mapped to OS exceptions:

- division: #DE
- overflow: #OF
- invalid opcode: #UD, #GP, #BR
- page fault: #SS, #PF
- FPU: #XM
- machine check: #MC

RIP, RFLAGS and RAX are saved before entry.

##### Division, overflow, invalid opcode, FPU

No registers are set. RAX is clobbered.

##### Page fault

The faulting address is stored in RAX.
CF is set if the fault was caused by a write, otherwise a read.

##### Machine check

TODO

#### Interrupts

The interrupt source can be identified by the value in EAX on entry:

| EAX            | description                |
| --------------:|:-------------------------- |
|              1 | timer                      |
|             31 | debug message              |
|      32 to 255 | hardware interrupt (IDT)   |

RIP, RFLAGS and RAX are saved before entry.

The interrupt handler is only called if the "interrupts enabled" flag is set.
Specifically, hardware interrupts are still enabled but the kernel
will immediately resume the OS.

For hardware interrupts, the OS must call "EOI" to send an EOI signal
to the appropriate hardware (usually LAPIC).
This is not required for timer and debug interrupts.

If "interrupt pending" flag is set, then "Poll" must be called
after handling the current interrupt.

EOI **must** be called after every interrupt.
EOI **must** be handled in LIFO order.

MMU
---

> NOTE: not implemented yet

The page tables used by the MMU are managed by the kernel.
The kernel initially allocates a single 2MiB buffer for the page table,
but more can be allocated in 2MiB chunks.

An OS can create multiple address spaces for isolation,
but only the initial address space is used for exceptions.

`syscall`s executed in other address spaces are always redirected to the
initial address space.

An OS must allocate page tables and roots inside this buffer.
The page tables can always be read freely but modifications must go through
the kernel as arbitrary writes would compromise the security of the kernel.

To simplify security checks and avoid potential resource leaks,
the kernel uses a strict scheme:

- roots must be explicitly allocated (up to 512).
- parent page tables must be explicitly allocated.

The first root (0) is considered the default address space and used for
system calls in other address spaces.


System log
----------

The kernel provides a global system log which is writeable by all OSes.
It is a simple array of fixed-size log entries.

Each entry starts with a 64-bit header:

| bits  | description    |
| -----:|:-------------- |
|  15:0 | source         |
| 63:16 | timestamp (µs) |

The source refers to the OS which wrote the message.
Source 0 is reserved by the kernel.

Entries are all 64 bytes each, including the header.
They *should* be valid UTF-8 and are delimited by a zero-byte
or the maximum length, though this is not validated.


IOMMU
-----

> NOTE: not implemented yet

The IOMMU is the equivalent of the MMU for all other devices on a platform.

Two IOMMU modes are supported:

- [ ] Intel VT-d
- [ ] AMD-Vi

Both Intel VT-d and AMD-VI reuse the page table format of the MMU,
which makes it _almost_ trivial to give an OS and devices the same view of memory.

AMD-VI assigns meaning to all the AVL bits in the page table instead of reusing
existing bits. For this reason none of the AVL bits are free for use by the OS.


### Intel VT-d

The VT-d IOMMU is exposed at a MMIO location specified by an ACPI table.
The table has signature "DMAR".


### AMD-Vi

The AMD-Vi IOMMU is exposed through a PCIe function. For this reason PCIe configuration
space cannot be exposed directly to the OS.

The PCIe function is identified with:

| field                    | value  |
|:------------------------ | ------:|
| class code               |    0x8 |
| subclass                 |    0x6 |
| programming interface    |    0x0 |

Additionally, it is expected to have ID `1022:1419` but this is not checked
as it is not a requirement.

None of the BARs are used. Instead, all MMIO regions are configured through
registers in the capability area. The requisite capability has ID `0xf`.

There are multiple versions of the IOMMU. The latests version known to the author
has `CapRev=1`, although QEMU appears to implement `CapRev=0`

> TODO figure out where document v2 or v1 is which describes this previous version.

#### QEMU

QEMU implements an emulated AMD-Vi IOMMU device. It can be enabled with
`-device amd-iommu`.

To trace IOMMU events, add `-trace '*amdvi*'`.
